Friends, welcome to Word on Fire Catholic Ministries.
Word on Fire is an apostolate dedicated to the mission of evangelization.
using media both old and new to share the faith on every continent and to facilitate an encounter with Christ and His Church.
The efforts of Word on Fire engage the culture and bring the transformative power of God's Word where it is most needed.
Today, we invite you to join Bishop Robert Barron as he preaches the gospel and shares the warmth and light of Christ with each one of us.
Peace be with you. Friends, for this 25th Sunday of Ordinary Time, I want to focus not on the Gospel. I preached on it many times before the great parable of the...
The unjust steward, which is very rich, but I want to focus on readings two and one, because when read together, I think.
They give us a very good sense of, you know,
Catholic social teaching in regard to the question of
Power.
Of political power.
The church's position is a subtle one, and I think much of the conversation today kind of breaks on either side of it.
And the church...
typically gives this sort of both and answer. I think you see the roots of it.
in these two texts the church gives us.
Let me first observe this.
And I've said this many times before.
I think the most influential 19th century philosopher on the scene today is
is Friedrich Nietzsche
More than Karl Marx.
Nietzsche, who said everything comes down to plays of power.
I'm oversimplifying it, of course, but that the fundamental reality is power and the abuse of power, the use of power, right?
Who has power?
Who's benefiting from it who's a victim of it
The tendency, especially today, to divide the world into two camps. There's oppressors who have power and the oppressed who don't have it.
and their ongoing struggle. Well, that's a very Nietzschean perspective.
Yeah. Bequeathed to modern times by figures such as Martin Heidegger, Michel Foucault, Ayn Rand. Yeah.
Many others.
And I think it's come to dominate.
It's the mentality of many. So that the...
There's a tendency to demonize power
You know, when you say, well, look, that group has got power, right?
Yeah, because they want to oppress others. That guy's got power, and that's not right. Right.
And these people are powerless and that's a problem.
So power tends to be seen as something
Almost entirely negative
Well, let me say this bluntly.
The Bible is not in sympathy.
with this sort of one-sided Nietzschean Foucauldian demonization of power.
The Bible does not see the world as divided simply into two camps of oppressors with power and oppressed
Who don't have power.
And one of the great texts, I think,
is the one that's proposed now for our second reading.
It's from Paul's first letter to...
Timothy.
Here's what we hear.
Beloved, first of all, I ask,
That supplications prayers
1. Petitions and thanksgivings be offered for everyone. 2.
For kings
And for all in authority.
That we may lead a quiet and tranquil life in all devotion and dignity.
Well, if Paul thought kings were just corrupt, kings were just the wielders of oppressive power,
Why would you pray for them? You want to overthrow them.
You'd want to resist them.
No, he's saying...
8.
For kings and all those in authority.
Why? That we may lead a quiet and tranquil life. Right.
What's the purpose of political power? Well, see, don't demonize it.
Because indeed, God is described as all-powerful, all-powerful.
So power can't in itself be a problem.
If God has power,
Well, those who are participating in God, who are imitating God in their use of power,
are doing something that's really good. And namely, we hear it.
then we may lead a quiet and tranquil life in all devotion and dignity. Not a bad little description of the purpose of government there.
So there's a kind of basic purpose of, you know, kind of keeping things organized.
Quiet and peaceful that we might
lead our lives productively.
economically and in terms of our friendships and relationships. If we're living in chaos,
Well, then we can't flourish as human beings. And so we need people in power that can provide for.
This tranquility.
I like to focus on
In all devotion and dignity
One of the cornerstones of Catholic social teaching is the dignity of the individual.
What's the government's purpose? I'm going to give it a somewhat American, more modern spin here, but...
Part of the purpose of government is to guarantee the dignity of citizens.
We speak of human rights and governments instituted to protect those rights, not creating them, but securing and protecting them.
All right tranquility peace
Dignity,
But then listen now as St. Paul goes on.
Adding another dimension.
This is good and pleasing.
To God our Savior.
We're praying for those in authority. Now, why? Why
Who wills everyone to be saved?
And to come to knowledge of the truth
Well, now he puts it in a very explicitly theological framework.
What's at least one of the purposes of political authority?
It's to allow for salvation. Meaning, it seems to me, the
Providing the context and conditions for a flourishing religiosity.
100%. We'll speak of religious liberty quite correctly. Yeah.
The free exercise of religion we say in our American context. Well, quite right. That's one of the purposes of government is to allow for religion to flourish.
Flourish.
And
So everyone to be saved and to come to knowledge of the truth.
That knowledge might be shared, that there might be the conditions that make real learning possible.
I think you hear of Thomas Jefferson who would say one of the purposes of government is to provide for education. Education.
See, beautiful, don't demonize power as though it's just a bad thing, it's just oppressive. No, no, pray, pray.
For those in authority, for all these reasons.
That we might have the basic tranquility we need to flourish
That we might even.
Uh, uh,
Be free to worship God properly.
Though we might have our dignity and rights preserved, those are all...
It's beautiful and important things, which is why in its social teaching, the church insists that
That a properly constituted government
is participating in the authority of God.
Now again, it's not to say, oh, they're flawless and we should never ask questions about them. No, no, no, no, no. I'll get there.
We'll get there in this very sermon.
But it does mean that legitimate political authority participates in the authority by which God governs.
The universe,
And so, indeed, look, in the Catholic liturgy, we are positively
Encouraged
Indeed, required to pray for those in authority.
You know, when we're putting the petitions together for Mass, the church recommends the first one be for the Pope and for the bishops, those who lead us in the spiritual order. But then the second
The second prayer is,
And I always follow this when I'm saying, you know, daily Mass. The second prayer should be for those in authority.
Those in political would pray for the president, for senators and representatives and our governors, etc.
Good.
Power should not be demonized.
We should recognize the
The practical
Moral and indeed spiritual purpose
Of real power.
Okay.
There's part one of Catholic social teaching reflected clearly now in Paul to Timothy. But now,
Let's look at the other side and for that
I turn the page back to reading one, which is from 1984 to 1985.
The fiery prophet Amos.
Amos is one of the greatest of the
Minor prophets, just means that his book is short of those of the major prophets.
But Amos was often cited by the leaders of our civil rights movement in the mid-20th century.
Because Amos is one of the great voices for the church.
Social justice.
Voice on behalf of the poor.
Listen now, a voice raised to the
In opposition.
To the abuse of authority
Now, having said all these positive things about political authority, not wishing to gainsay any of it,
I also want to echo
The prophet Amos.
Now listen as he speaks
Hear this
You who trample upon the needy
And destroy the poor of the land.
When will the new moon be over? you ask.
That we may sell our grain and the Sabbath, that we may display the wheat. Amen.
Okay, the first part of it is clear enough.
You in authority.
who trample upon the needy. In other words, you're not securing their dignity. You're not securing tranquility for them. You're using your power
hour to trample upon them.
And to destroy the poor of the land.
Not to lift them up
Let's say through a properly managed economy that gives people the opportunity.
you know,
To to move out of their poverty
You're not lifting them up. You're trampling down the poor.
Now, are there political authorities that do this? Yes. Up and down the ages, we can see them. We can see them around us today. And the church raises a prophetic word.
Eddig voice, 198
against them.
Now, the second part is a little more puzzling to us, but it's making an important point.
"'When will the new moon be over, you ask, "'that we may sell our grain and the Sabbath, "'that we may display the wheat?'
what they're saying there is during times of these formal religious ceremonies and these certain times of the year they were not allowed to do business.
I can't wait for this religion thing to be over so I can get back to my work of exploitation. That's what he's saying.
Notice in 1 Timothy,
One of the purposes of a well-organized government is to provide for the flourishing of religion.
But now here's people in power who are saying, "Ah, religion."
Religion is just getting in the way of my exploitation.
You can't wait for these services to be over.
That's a
Profound perversion
Of the purpose of government, of power.
Listen to this now.
He imagines these sort of wealthy
Powerful figure saying
We will diminish the ephah, add to the shekel, and fix our scales for cheating.
Well, what's that?
But,
So economic exploitation. So we're talking about weighing things and measuring things and, you know, what's this cost and, you know,
Instead of doing it fairly, it's
No, I'm going to fix the system. I'm going to game the system to get what I want. Now, in ancient times, it was all kind of crude, just a matter of, you know, how you measure it.
measuring things.
Is it being done today?
Yeah, just in a much more sophisticated manner and probably a somewhat more hidden manner.
Are there people today economically who are gaming the system?
For their own advantage?
Indifferent to the poor?
In fact, using the poor to get ahead themselves
Yeah, sure.
What's the purpose, everybody, of economic power?
Not just to aggrandize my own, you know, position.
But to use my economic power to lift others up
See, and there's Catholic social teaching, right?
Catholic social teaching affirms the market economy. Doesn't like socialism.
or socialist forums. It likes the market economy for all kinds of reasons.
but but
It wants...
More and more people involved in the market economy so they can participate in it in a way that lifts them up.
So it likes investment that's not just for the advantage of the investor, but investment that is
Lifts others up and provides more opportunities and jobs and so on.
How do we think about our economic lives? How do we think about the power that some of us wield economically?
Just, just.
Make me richer.
No, no. The focus should be on
And indeed, don't the popes tell us this in the Catholic social teaching?
Once the demands of necessity and propriety have been met in your own life,
Everything else you own.
For longs to the poor.
That's Leo the 13th
the founder of the modern Catholic social teaching tradition
That's a hard saying.
That's a hard saying everybody
How are we using our economic power?
As well as our political power
See, Catholic social teaching
It doesn't demonize power.
It doesn't demonize economic power or economic opportunity. Right.
But it wants to make sure that both political power and economic power
Our animated
And finally, finally, finally,
By love.
So that my power is used
For the good of the other,
Now, I'll close with this.
in God what come together
Precisely power and love.
Is God all powerful? Yes, over all things. Nothing limits God's capacity.
But his power is identical to his love
Now we found it.
Now we found the key to Catholic social teaching.
May the power you legitimately exercise
They'll always be animated by love.
And God bless you.
Thank you for listening to this week's homily from Bishop Robert Barron.
For more resources from Bishop Barron, please visit wordonfire dot Org.